(502) 895-9500   |   info@ctlonline.org

     

SUBSCRIBE TO 3 FOR THURSDAYS

a

SHOP NOW

STRATEGY FOCUS

Frayer Model & Four-Square
Adaptation
PURPOSE



The Frayer Model is a graphic organizer that promotes critical thinking and
helps deepen  students’ understanding of key vocabulary. When using this
strategy, students determine and clarify the meaning of targeted vocabulary
words encountered while studying key concepts or big ideas. By providing
students with a structure to examine these words, focused primarily on
contextual meaning and not simply definition, this strategy is effective in
helping students come to understand vocabulary at a level beyond defining
words. The focus on characteristics, examples, and non-examples pushes
learners to build a more concrete understanding of the meaning of the
words.

PROCESS



1. Pre-select key vocabulary word(s) from the text or the unit and
review them with students.
2. Provide students the Frayer Model graphic organizer and explain
the four sections and what they mean. When introducing the Frayer
Model, it is important to use a Think Aloud to model the process of
how to use the Frayer Model with a vocabulary word.
3. Work with the students to build knowledge of the term. You can
use small group discussion, review various artifacts such as pictures,
images, primary sources, charts, etc.
4. Have students work together to identify examples and relevant
non-examples. 
5. While monitoring student progress, share new ideas with the class
to discuss and have students add characteristics as they are
recognized. Work with students to identify those essential
characteristics from the examples and non-examples compared to
non-essential characteristics.
6. Provide groups an opportunity for students to share their thinking
with others through an Academic Dialogue strategy, posting artifacts
around the room. Posting around the room allows students to
revisit and extend thinking and reference for the remainder of the
unit of study.

PROBING  QUESTIONS

CONSIDERATIONS



How was your understanding of the word(s) similar or different
from someone else? 
What is your rationale for examples and non-examples?
How did the Frayer model help you with learning new vocabulary? 
How might you encounter or use this word again?

The Frayer Model is primarily used during, and after learning to
deepen understanding.
Preparing students to effectively use the Frayer Model should be a
gradual release process that provides modeling and scaffolding.
For example, the teacher may complete a Frayer Model with the
whole class with accessible content before having students do
them with a partner or small group.
The Frayer Model is NOT intended to be used as a worksheet for
homework. 
Consider pairing the Frayer Model with another Vocabulary
strategy such as the Interactive Word Wall or an Academic
Dialogue strategy, as discussion is an important part of this
strategy.

SCAFFOLDS



General Scaffolds

Pre-Teach/front-load key vocabulary.
Create anchor charts with key vocabulary relevant to the unit of
study, which should be changed and updated with each new unit.
Students create and frequently use their own Alphablocks for
each unit of study. They might include the words in English and
their home language, as well as a picture cue.
Bold key vocabulary words on slides.
Use the Gradual Release model (I do/you watch, I do/you help, you
do/I help, you do/I watch to provide scaffolding for students.
Provide graphic organizers for student use. For example, complete
a Frayer Model with the whole class with accessible content
before having students do it with a small group or partner.
Model how to write a response.
Provide examples of what student responses might look like.
Encourage and allow students to access and use vocabulary
resources and tools such as anchor charts, word walls, word bank,
and personal dictionaries.
Provide students with sufficient time to think and write.
Provide opportunities for students to respond in a variety of ways
(e.g., pictures, text, mix of English and home language, etc.)

Scaffolds for Multilingual Learners

Entering/Emerging:

Write down key words and essential vocabulary on your board,
chart paper, or interactive whiteboard to help students identify
what’s most important.
Pre-teach/front-load key vocabulary.
Create anchor charts with key vocabulary relevant to the unit of
study.
Provide content-specific word banks, as well as visual support
(e.g., posters, diagrams, pictures).
Provide lists of linking words and phrases, transitions and
connectors.



Have students create their own personal dictionaries that provide
references to words/phenomena in their home language and
include picture cues for each word.
Model differentiating between everyday and technical language.
Allow students to access and use vocabulary resources in order to
recount, argue, and explain.
Model how to write a variety of responses.
Provide examples of what students’ responses might look like
Allow students to respond in a variety of ways (e.g., pictures, text,
mix of English and home language, etc.).
Provide sentence stems/frames and graphic organizers.

Developing/Expanding:

Write down key words and essential vocabulary on your board,
chart paper, or interactive whiteboard to help students identify
what’s most important.
Pre-teach/front-load key vocabulary.
Create anchor charts with key vocabulary relevant to the unit of
study.
Bold key vocabulary on slides.
Model how to provide precise words and phrases to provide
details, descriptions, classifications, comparisons, causes/effects,
or procedures.
Provide lists of transitional words.
Model how to write a variety of responses.
Provide examples of information presented objectively with a
neutral tone.

Bridging/Reaching:
Write down key words and essential vocabulary on your board,
chart paper, or interactive whiteboard to help students identify
what’s most important.
Pre-teach/front-load key vocabulary.
Create anchor charts with key vocabulary relevant to the unit of
study.
Bold key vocabulary on slides.
Provide examples of research reports and summaries.
Model how to write a concluding statement that follows from and
supports the information presented.



Model how to convey sequence and show relationships among
experiences and events.

Four-Square Vocabulary Graphic Organizers

While the Frayer Model includes four distinct categories for investigation
(definition, examples, non-examples, and characteristics), Four-Square
Vocabulary Organizers use alternative categories. This adaptation changes
the level of thinking students are expected to use, but can be utilized to
access new vocabulary supporting different disciplines and/or learners’
needs.

CONTENT APPLICATIONS